#summary Release Notes for Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS)
#labels Featured,Phase-Implementation

=FDS Release Notes=

Each version number of FDS contains three integers, for example, FDS 6.1.0. The number 6 is the _major_ release; the number 1 is the _minor_ release; the number 0 is the _maintenance_ release. This page provides a summary of releases since FDS 5.1. It also provides details of the changes made between maintenance releases and the corresponding SVN revision number.

Changes in the maintenance release only involve bug fixes, whereas changes to the minor release involve changes in program functionality. It is recommended that you continually update maintenance releases, but update the minor release only with the start of new projects because some results might change.

[#Details_of_FDS_Maintenance_Releases More details of FDS maintenance releases] can be found at the bottom of this page, which lists the SVN revision number that corresponds to each FDS version number. For example, FDS version 6.0.0 corresponds to SVN revision number 17279.


==FDS 6.1.1==

  * Speed up processing of particles and droplets.

  * Fix bug in `'RADIATIVE HEAT FLUX GAS'` output.

  * Add `'NUMBER OF PARTICLES'` and `'CPU TIME PER STEP'` as `DEVC` output.

  * Fix radiation heat flux to walls that align with mesh boundary.

  * Add relaxation to HVAC pressure boundary condition.

  * Allow for creation of new primitive species based on a predefined species using the keyword PRIMITIVE.
  


==FDS 6.1.0==

===Parallel Computing===

  * Release OpenMP version as the default.

  * Include additional bundled libraries for MPI Linux versions of FDS.

  * Use MPI_IN_PLACE in MPI_ALLGATHERV calls.

===Species and Combustion===

  * Fix ability to define a SPEC with a formula and have chemistry picked up by SIMPLE CHEMISTRY.

  * Additional predefined gas and liquid species added
  
  * Can now define THIRD_BODY reactions (i.e., reactions like A + B + M -> C + M)

===Boundary Conditions===

  * Fix vent splitting over meshes for HVAC.

  * Add CONVERT_VOLUME_TO_MASS to SURF for VEL type boundary conditions.

  * Change VOLUME_FLUX to VOLUME_FLOW to be consistent with HVAC.

  * Overhauled treatment of mass flux at solid boundaries.

  * Disallow velocity boundary condition for thin obstructions.

  * MAX_LEAK_PATHS may be set by the user

===Particles===

  * For solid particles with more than one ORIENTATION vector, the radiation heat flux is computed as an integrated average over the appropriate fraction of the surface. Previously, the heat flux was computed to a plate normal to the ORIENTATION vector.

===Output===

  * Add MASS FLOW WALL, HEAT FLOW WALL, and VOLUME FLOW WALL as SOLID_PHASE_OUTPUT device quantities.
  
  * Add SPEC_ID to duct output quantities
  
  * Add QUANTITY_RANGE to DEVC for limiting integration when STATISTICS is set

  * Add AMPUA_Z, CPUA_Z, MPUA_Z, and MPUV_Z output quantities.
  


==FDS 6.0.1==

  * The MPI version of FDS is now compiled with Open MPI 1.6.5.

  * Fixes related to lumped species definitions.

  * Use FLUSH statement instead of CLOSE/OPEN in dump routines.

  * Add ability to modify most thermophysical properties for user-defined mixtures.

  * Fix bug in particle tracking algorithm.

  * Fix initialization of back wall temperature.

  * Add inlet velocity profile functionality via RAMP_V_X, etc., on SURF line.

  * Include FDS User, Technical, Verification, Validation, and Configuration guides in bundle.

==FDS 6.0.0==

===Hydrodynamics and Turbulence===

  * Conservative, total variation diminishing (TVD) scalar transport is implemented: Superbee (LES default) and CHARM (DNS default).  These schemes prevent over-shoots and under-shoots in species concentrations and temperature.

  * Improved models for the turbulent viscosity are implemented: Deardorff (default), Dynamic Smagorinsky, and Vreman.  These models provide more dynamic range to the flow field for coarse resolution and converge to the correct solution at fine resolution.

  * The conservative form of the sensible enthalpy equation is satisfied by construction in the FDS 6 formulation, eliminating temperature anomalies and energy conservation errors due to numerical mixing.

  * The baroclinic torque is included by default.

  * Improvements are made to the wall functions for momentum and heat flux.  An optional wall heat flux model accounts for variable Prandtl number fluids.

  * Jarrin's Synthetic Eddy Method (SEM) is implemented for turbulent boundary conditions at vents.

===Species and Combustion===

  * Custom species mixtures ("lumped species") can be defined on the SPEC line.

  * Turbulent combustion is handled with a new partially-stirred batch reactor model.  At the subgrid level, species exist in one of two states: unmixed or mixed.  The degree of mixing evolves over the FDS time step by the interaction by exchange with the mean (IEM) mixing model.  Chemical kinetics may be considered infinitely fast or obey an Arrhenius rate law.

  * It is now possible to transport, produce, and consume toxins such as CO and soot.  Chemical mechanisms must be provided by the user and may include reversible reactions.

  * It is now possible to deposit aerosol species onto surfaces.

  * Increased number of predefined species that now include liquid properties.

===Lagrangian Particles===

  * Moving particles can be assigned a SURF_ID.

  * More alternatives and user-defined option are available for the liquid droplet size distribution.
  
  * The user can specify the radiative properties of the liquid droplets.

  * Drag effects of thin porous media (i.e., window screens) can be simulated using planes of particles.

===Solid Phase Heat Transfer and Pyrolysis===

  * The basic 1-D heat transfer and pyrolysis model for solid surfaces remains the same, but there has been a change in several of the input parameters to expand functionality and readability of the input file.

  * More attention should be paid on the specification of MATL densities for the pyrolysis model. Unlike FDS 5, now the pyrolysis model tries to determine if the surface should shrink or swell, based on the MATL densities.

===HVAC===

  * Filters, louvered vents, and heating/cooling capability has been added for HVAC systems.

  * HVAC now functional with MPI.

===Radiation===

  * !RadCal database extended to include additional fuel species.

  * It is now possible to assign a !RadCal species to a SPEC.

  * In cells with heat release, the emission term is based on a corrected sigma T^4^ such that when this term is integrated over the flame volume the specified radiative fraction (default 0.3) is recovered.  This differs from FDS 5 and earlier where the radiative fraction times the heat release rate is applied locally as the emission term.

===Multi-mesh Computations===

  * By default, FDS now iterates pressure and velocity at mesh and solid boundaries.  The error tolerance and maximum number of iterations may be set by the user.

===Control functions===

  * CTRL functions have been extended to include math operations.

  * The evaluation of RAMPs and DEVCs can be stopped, freezing their value, based upon the activation of a device or control function.

===Devices and Output===

  * Multiple pipe networks can be specified for sprinklers for reduction of flow rate based on the number of operating heads.

  * The numerical value of a control function can be output with a DEVC.

  * A line of devices can be specified using a number of POINTS on one DEVC line.

  * Statistical outputs for RMS, covariance, and correlation coefficient are available.

==FDS 5.5==

  * Restoration of the baroclinic torque term in the momentum equation, by default (removed in 5.5.3)

  * Secondary breakup model for droplets (simplified version of WAVE model by Reitz 1987)

  * Ability to have a RAMP use a DEVC for the independent variable by the keyword DEVC_ID on RAMP

  * Built-in thermophysical properties for a number of liquids (water and some common fuels)

  * Expanded number of gases with built-in thermophysical properties

  * Expanded set of droplet output quantities from PDPA devices

  * RAMPs and TAUs for EXTERNAL_FLUX on SURF

  * RAMP_PART and TAU_PART on SURF to control PARTICLE_MASS_FLUX

  * Use of a SURF line to describe Lagrangian particles

==FDS 5.4==

  * Pyrolysis model for solid materials has changed. The most important change is the definition of REFERENCE_TEMPERATURE and the elimination of REFERENCE_RATE. See the FDS User's Guide for more details.

  * Werner-Wengle wall model, a better description of the velocity boundary condition.

  * OpenMP parallelization option. This will allow you to use multiple cores/processors on a single computer to process a single mesh case, or when combined with MPI, will allow each mesh on each computer to exploit the multiple cores/processors.

  * ORIFICE_DIAMETER has been added to PROP inputs to provide a simple way to set droplet velocity. This is an alternative to specifying DROPLET_VELOCITY.

  * Thermally-Induced Electrical Failure (THIEF) model added to predict damage to electrical cables.


==FDS 5.3==

  * New output quantity: Fractional Effective Dose (FED) by Purser.

  * TIME INTEGRAL statistics is available for device outputs.

  * Yields of any explicitly-defined (via the SPEC line) gas species can be specified on the MATL lines using the new parameter NU_GAS.

  * The user can specify how the sprinkler pipe pressure depends on the number of open nozzles. The flow rate, droplet speed and median diameter are updated correspondingly.

  * The logical keyword DRY has been added to DEVC.  When using the mixture fraction and specifying either MASS FRACTION or VOLUME FRACTION, use of DRY will give that fraction minus water vapor (i.e. give an output like a typical gas analyzer).

  * A Phase Doppler Particle Analysis (PDPA) device has been defined for detailed measurements of droplet sprays.

  * A new namelist group called MULT (short for multiplier) allows you to multiply OBSTructions and MESHes easily without having to retype the input lines over and over.

  * A new parameter called BULK_DENSITY has been added to the OBST namelist group to indicate more easily the total combustible mass within an OBSTruction that can BURN_AWAY.

  * Pressure ZONEs can now be opened, and sealed compartments can become unsealed via an OPEN boundary.

  * The output quantity that was once called 'soot density' and the newer version, QUANTITY='DENSITY', SPEC_ID='soot', is now in units of kg/m^3.

  * Device (DEVC) output units can be changed via a CONVERSION_FACTOR.


==FDS 5.2==

  * A simple "Eddy Dissipation" model is added to predict the mixing time of fuel and oxygen. Previous versions of FDS used the time step, which was tied to the flow velocity via the CFL criterion. The eddy dissipation model ties the mixing time to the turbulent diffusion coefficient, which is ultimately related to the eddy viscosity of the Smagorinsky form of LES. The eddy dissipation concept is based on scaling arguments and involves an empirical coefficient which has been determined by comparing calculations to classical fire plume experiments and correlations.

  * The names of the output quantities have changed, but the old names are still acceptable. The idea is to use parameters like SPEC_ID and PART_ID in conjunction with QUANTITY's like 'MASS FRACTION' and 'VOLUME FRACTION.' Details are in the User's Guide. Also, the underscores in QUANTITY names are no longer needed.

  * The default number of droplets introduced in a spray has increased to 5000 per second, and the insertion time has decreased to 0.01 s. The old values were 1000 and 0.05, respectively.

  * The mean beam length (PATH_LENGTH) for the radiation solver is no longer based on the size of the overall domain, but rather it defaults to 5 times the mesh cell size. 

  * It is now possible to declare explicitly a surrogate species for smoke that can be visualized with SMOKE3D and a new output QUANTITY called VISIBILITY.


==FDS 5.1==

In simulations involving multiple meshes, FDS no longer allows the meshes to be arbitrarily connected. Starting with version 5.1, mesh resolution can only increase or decrease in integer increments. This change in functionality means that some input files that ran previously will no longer run.


=Details of FDS Maintenance Releases=

Version 6.1.0 - May 27, 2014 (SVN Revision 19412)

Version 6.0.1 - November 26, 2013 (SVN Revision 17534)

Version 6.0.0 - November 4, 2013 (SVN Revision 17279)

Version 5.5.3 - October 29, 2010 (SVN Revision 7031)

Version 5.5.2 - September 3, 2010 (SVN Revision 6706)

Version 5.5.1 - June 23, 2010 (SVN Revision 6385)

Version 5.5.0 - April 6, 2010 (SVN Revision 6006)

Version 5.4.3 - December 4, 2009 (SVN Revision 5210)

Version 5.4.2 - October 19, 2009 (SVN Revision 4957)

Version 5.4.1 - September 10, 2009 (SVN Revision 4697)

Version 5.4.0 - September 1, 2009 (SVN Revision 4629)

Version 5.3.1 - April 8, 2009 (SVN Revision 3729)

Version 5.3.0 - January 30, 2009 (SVN Revision 3193)

Version 5.2.5 - December 10, 2008 (SVN Revision 2828)

Version 5.2.4 - November 11, 2008 (SVN Revision 2651)

Version 5.2.3 - August 16, 2008 (SVN Revision 2514)

Version 5.2.2 - August 16, 2008 (SVN Revision 2510)

Version 5.2.1 - September 15, 2008 (SVN Revision 2376)

Version 5.2.0 - August 1, 2008 (SVN Revision 2087)

Version 5.1.6 - May 8, 2008 (SVN Revision 1673)

Version 5.1.5 - May 8, 2008 (SVN Revision 1650)

Version 5.1.4 - March 14, 2008 (SVN Revision 1437)

Version 5.1.3 - February 26, 2008 (SVN Revision 1373)

Version 5.1.2 - February 1, 2008 (SVN Revision 1262)

Version 5.1.1 - January 21, 2008 (SVN Revision 1217)

Version 5.1.0 - January 8, 2008 (SVN Revision 1162)

Version 5.0.3 - December 5, 2007 (SVN Revision 1069)

Version 5.0.2 - November 12, 2007 (SVN Revision 977)

Version 5.0.1 - October 12, 2007 (SVN Revision 836)

Version 5.0.0 - October 2, 2007 (SVN Revision 721)

=Log History=

Click [http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/source/list here] to view a complete list of the revision history.